You're looking after the, you'll be looking
after who's on Zoom and who's not.
Just gimme an indication as they come in,
if they're on the whole of the session.
Useful. Just as, as we go on.
Alright, welcome.
Thank you.
Is it part of yourself up here?
Thank your patience everyone.
We'll just, uh, let, let everything get set up so we're
alright.
So we're ready to go. Okay.
So welcome everyone, um, to the committee.
Um, and we are hearing from animate New Zealand Holdings.
First, um, Natalie, Natalie Mullen shot. Yes. Thank you.
Get that right? Yes, you did very go right.
Join us at the table. Um, what, just for the sake
of everyone here, we'll introduce ourselves
and I know we have, um, several
of our fellow submitters gonna be on Zoom as well.
So M Greg O'Connor, the chair of the petitions committee,
and a local member of Parliament in
Kiata. I'm Greg
Fleming, the deputy chair
and the National Party MP for mga, Kiki in Ann Auckland.
Good Afternoon. I'm Paula Garcia, the National MP
for Newin in Auckland.
And we have a guest, a guest MP here. Uh,
Good afternoon, Jenny Crot, New Zealand first mp,
also a parliamentary undersecretary.
And, um, just have recently put, uh,
my members' bill into the biscuit and,
Alright. Okay,
so welcome. Now, um, Natalie, you can, uh, take it
that, uh, your submission has been read.
Um, we have 10 minutes, so preferably leave us some time
for questions, uh, and the end of your submission.
Yours,
Kiara, and thank you for the opportunity
to let me speak today.
My name said is Natalie moho,
and I'm the general Manager of marketing at Animates.
Firstly, I want to acknowledge
and thank the committee members who have taken the time
to read our submission and are here to make a difference.
Animates is New Zealand's leading pet care retailer,
and every day we witness the deep bond between pets
and animals, pets and people.
Pets are not just animals, they are family. Every year.
Fireworks cause predictable
and entirely preventable harm to pets,
livestock and wildlife.
Animals are being injured, traumatized, and often killed.
While some hope people will use fireworks responsibly,
we know that even with care harm still occurs.
Just this week, a Canterbury family lost their beloved
Australian shepherd, Izzy,
after she bolted from her fully fenced yard
during a fireworks burst, Izzy was found severely injured,
two kilometers from home, later dying.
Sadly, her story is not unique.
Every year, animals across a TRO suffer
because of unpredictable fireworks use.
Last year, over 93,000 kiwis alongside nearly 80,000 pets,
signed the pull print petition, calling
for a ban on the public sale of fireworks.
Over 10 times the support
of any previous petition calling for this.
The conversation didn't begin just
with the full print petition.
It has been building steadily for years,
gaining momentum across aa.
While our petition is rooted in our love
and care for animals, public safety
and cost implications are much broader than that.
The burden on our environment, emergency
and health services, local councils
and the police are substantial.
The message is clear.
New Zealanders care deeply about the welfare
of their animals and legislative change is the only way
to protect them effectively.
We are not alone in this call.
The SPCA, the New Zealand Veterinary Association and Fire
and Emergency NZ all support this change.
We are also grateful to have the written support
of Councilor Josephine Bartley, former chair
and soon to be reappointed chair
of Auckland Council's Regulatory and Safety Committee.
She's reiterated
that fireworks are not just a one day issue.
They're used throughout the year, repeatedly harming animals
and causing fires and property damage.
Auckland Council has long supported a national ban on
private sales, but can't act locally without legislation,
which is why their support
for this petition is so important.
These organizations bring extensive expertise and authority.
We ask that their voices be heard alongside the public.
As you will know on Tuesday,
New Zealand first introduced a member's bill
to ban the public sale
and use of fireworks signaling significant
recognition of this problem.
Your select committee has a distinct opportunity to build on
that momentum by recommending the house supports this bill
or equivalent legislation
that would bring about real change.
You can light fireworks every day
of the year in New Zealand.
So personal responsibility alone is unhelpful.
Every year, all year dogs flee.
Cats hide or run into traffic and livestock such as horses
and heifers suffer from panic induced injuries
and long lasting trauma.
These incidents have been well documented in the media
across the country year after year.
Consider the story of fancy pants.
A heifer on a rural property near Tika who's panicked
during fireworks, led her to fall into a water trough
and later die after entanglement and farm fencing
or Zeus, a rescue dog from West Auckland who refuses
to eat due to the stress and trauma of unexpected fireworks.
Responsible use still causes harm
because it is unpredictable.
It can happen without warning at any time.
There is no safe window or season for animals to adapt.
The harm caused to our animals doesn't discriminate.
All animals are at risk.
Our family, pets, companion animals, our therapy, animals,
livestock and wildlife.
And the impact doesn't stop there.
The humans that love
and care for them are impacted too stressed,
traumatized, grieving.
Last week on a radio New Zealand political panel,
national MP Nicola Willis expressed sympathy
for pets affected by fireworks,
saying she wished people would use them responsibly.
A wish is well intentional, but it is sadly not enough.
Even when news carefully fireworks are sudden, loud
and bright, animals cannot distinguish
fireworks from other dangers.
They only sense fear.
The scale of preventable harm is real and it is significant.
Over 32 emergency call outs were made on GE folks' 2024
alone and around 300 a CC claims each year arise from
fireworks related injuries.
Last year was the worst year
for firework related fires since 2017
with 166 unwanted fires right across the motto.
And thousands of pets, like as either shepherd,
are traumatized or killed annually.
These are not isolated incidents.
They're repeated, preventable outcomes
of outdated legislation,
and they're often caused
by people acting entirely within the current laws
purchased in the sales window, stockpiled
for use any time of the year.
Yet the effect is the same, unplanned, unexpected,
highly traumatizing.
As members of parliament, your role is
to protect the welfare of all New Zealanders,
including those who cannot speak for themselves.
Our animals depend on you to act with care.
Legislative change is the only way
to prevent this predictable harm.
By banning the public sale of fireworks
and focusing on licensed professionally managed displays,
we can protect animals
and people reduce the burden on pressured emergency services
and maintain celebrations.
Kiwis cherish public events,
on the other hand are notifiable.
This means they're planned, managed,
and communicated in advance,
giving animal owners emergency services
and the communities the chance to prepare.
That simple safeguard makes an enormous difference.
We are not asking for the end of celebration or for the joy
and fun that fireworks brings to New Zealanders.
Many will hold onto the nostalgia of backyard fireworks
and that's understandable,
but it is time to enjoy them in a new safer way
where risk is controlled and harm is minimized.
Protecting the people and the animals we love.
By respecting guardian shop of our land
and animals, we can celebrate in ways
that care for our papa.
We are asking for thoughtful leadership
that recognizes animals as Tonga, pets, as cherished family,
livestock and wildlife as our neighbors.
Our request is clear ban the public salad fireworks
limit their use to organize public display
and support enforcement
and education that protects animals, people,
and our environment.
The status quo keeps us all at risk
of harm every day of the year.
We urge you to recommend to the house that legislation such
as the New Zealand first members bill be supported
and that meaningful change begins now.
By doing so, you'll protect all New Zealanders people
and animals alike
and show leadership grounded in compassion.
And Kai, thank you for your time
and I welcome your questions.
Alright, uh, thank you very much
and we're joined by Kalene Carter from, uh, from the
Apologies for being late.
Um, any questions? Uh, Fleming,
I see you Nelly. Thank you very
much for that. Um, so you,
you are still supportive of the idea
of public five weeks displays.
We recognize that as a compromise
because the core issue around the harm to animals is
that unplanned and unpredictability of it
because public fireworks
or the the display of them, they're notified.
Um, communities are aware of them.
That gives pet pets and pet parents and wildlife
or livestock owners the opportunity
to manage as much as they can.
We feel that's a compromise
that at least would have a significant reduction in the harm
that's occurring to animals.
So when you say it's compromised, you mean you think that
that makes it more achievable,
but your ultimate, your preference would
be to get rid of them completely. In all contexts,
Our focus has been on the span of the sale
of fireworks to the public.
That is where our key focus is on for this.
Okay, so it's the focus on the ban on the, on the sale
of fireworks to the public Right.
Rather than on the use of them.
So you're assuming that if the former is affected,
the latter won't become an issue?
Correct. It would certainly reduce any risk of harm
to animals because of the ability for people to plan.
Okay. It's the unpredictability
of fireworks going off at any time throughout the year
that is causing the harm.
Are you also looking to restrict the use of the, of,
of fireworks because whilst, uh, retail
fireworks could be banned, um, it's possible
that people could access them through, um, licensed, uh,
commercial importers for what I'm, I'm assuming if,
if you are happy with the compromise, it's going
to be public fireworks, obviously, uh,
there will be some people who are, uh, licensed, uh, to, um,
to, to import those fireworks.
Um, so are you looking for any kind of regulation around,
around the authorized or non-authorized use of them?
We would expect that there would still be some certain
controls in place to ensure that the people
that are authorized to host, um, private events as, as part
of like community events Yeah.
Would fall under regulation or some form of governance.
Governance so that not just anyone is able to yeah, purchase
and and light these off. Okay.
Thank you very much.
Uh, Judy Cro, thank you for all your advocacy, um,
and lovely to see you here today.
Uh, you mentioned, um,
the conversation is gaining momentum in terms of, uh,
progressing towards a fireworks ban.
Um, you've said that it's been tracking over
and you've been tracking this over a number of years.
You've seen an increase in, uh, the people
that venture into animate stores sort
of raising this as as a concern.
Do you believe that New Zealand has reached
that tipping point where the social license
for fireworks no longer exists?
Can you speak to that at all?
Absolutely. If I look at our animate stores
and the experience that our team members,
both in our retail stores
and in our veterinarian clinics, more
and more people are coming in seeking help
and advice on how to manage their pet
and take care of their pet.
And that is growing. We can see that in our sales figures,
which is part of our submission.
Um, and that is also represented in the number
of signatures that were in the petition.
A certainly a significant number compared to prior years.
And also if you have a look at the media representation
and even in the tone in media,
you can see there's a significant shift from a view
that might have been a bit more, um,
focused on perceived minority to a recognition
that actually the unpredictable use
of fireworks throughout the year is impacting the majority
and the majority of New Zealanders want it banned.
Can I just ask that more? So we're getting there.
Just, uh, one question.
Um, so is this the leading cause
of injuries to pets
In New Zealand for our veterinarian clinics?
No, we don't believe so. One of the challenges, what
Is, what is, do you know?
I would have to go back and get that.
It would be based on our veterinarian standards and of care.
I wouldn't have the information for a wider industry.
Okay, thank you. And one other question, um, one
of the following submitters is gonna be from the, um,
firearms industry, sorry, fire works industry, excuse me.
The, um, no fraudulent slip in there.
Um, and just wondering, they will say that this is animate.
Were were involved in this as something
of a marketing exercise.
I do notice that you are the marketing
or the general manager marketing for animate.
Just could you just clear that up for us?
Yeah, no problem. Um, our purpose at Animates is
to make our world a happier place for the love of pets.
And there are a number of ways that we do this.
We challenged ourselves on
how could we live our purpose on behalf
of the entire company in a way that was meaningful.
And when we spoke to our teams
and when we spoke to our customers, this was one
of the leading causes
and issue of distress of what makes pets unhappy.
So we took it upon ourselves to bring this to life
and use our, I guess our, our size
and ability to do something
and support all the other pet owners
and petition submitters that have tried
to do it in, in at Behind.
I'm here today on behalf of Animates
because um, I led the initiative that was my,
uh, part of my role.
But I'm here representing every single one
of the 800 New Zealand employees we have across A TRR.
Alright, look, thank you very much.
Um, and we could talk long,
but unfortunately we've got quite a few submitters
so we're gonna have to keep moving.
So thank you very much. Thank
You.
Um, have uh, Rowan Harrison, please.
Yeah, come on up here, Roan,
I'll sit in the middle.
Yeah, I see you've got a companion with you.
You're welcome to come too if you want.
Walk out.
Um, um, grab some water.
I think I'll run out the voice.
Alright, welcome. Okay, you've, uh, seen the drill.
Um, we won't have just again
and 10 minutes take your submission as read,
but, uh, looking forward to hearing from
you, hopefully time for questions.
Thank you. Um,
Harrison,
thank you for the opportunity to meet with
in this room today and present my
submission and speak to it.
Um, I, um, live in Nui
and I also come from there, um, in, no,
in October last year leading up to Guy Forks, um,
some friends and myself,
we started a grassroots local community petition
and, uh, we went around the malls and the libraries
and we would go down to the popular, um,
markets on a Saturday morning.
And we had a big ban, printed ban,
the public sale of fireworks.
So it could be easily read from a distance.
'cause sometimes people pretend not
to notice these petitions are happening.
And, um, and the response
to this petition was overwhelmingly positive.
Um, at the markets we would have people
ped up two 3D you know, comments being made.
Like, this is one petition I want
to sign, I want to support.
Why hasn't something been done about this? Ready?
How many petitions do we have to sign?
Um, and the opportunity to speak with people.
Ka khi, just like our previous submitter, talking
to people face to face who wanted to share these stories,
who wanted to honor their pets, who had been traumatized
by fireworks or even killed by fireworks.
And we often said, gosh, we need
to write all these stories down.
And some of them are in my submission, as you would've read.
And we did have one lighthearted moment
where an elderly gentle man came sort
of slowly walking up the table.
He leaned over Jules
and he says, can you please explain to me why you want
to ban the public sale of firewood?
And, and, um, we kind of looked at each other
and said, you need to kind of just step back
and read the banner again and stepped back
and said, oh, ban the public sale of fireworks.
This is right. And we said it was a bit
of a specsavers moment that maybe he needed to, um,
but he, you know,
signed the fireworks petition, which is great.
Um, this is Tui, this is our Wau.
Um, very much loved, um, member of our
and valued member of our Wau.
Uh, TUI was a rescue dog, uh, from the SBCA.
Um, she was 14 years old
and she developed, um, cancer of the Liver.
And so we had to have her euthanized a year and a half ago.
Guy, guy Fors was always a traumatic time for us, um,
because we think, oh no, God, fireworks, we need
to get outta town, go somewhere quiet.
But when that wasn't possible, um, yeah,
we just had to do our best with toy.
And as soon as the fireworks would start,
she would start trembling hing.
I couldn't believe how far
her tongue could hang out of her mouth.
Um, and the terror in her eyes.
And I made this promise to her
that one day I would do something about fireworks.
And my mother has always said,
never make promises you can't keep.
So I know mom's watching us.
So I'm here on behalf of Tui has
as my motivation to be here today.
So some of the stories we heard, some of the things
that were shared, and I, one of them was, um,
obviously the stockpiling of fireworks,
but we had a guy who said his neighbor had bought $500 worth
of fireworks and he stored them in his boat.
And then he said, well, what's
to stop my neighbor just going home,
dismantling all those fireworks and making some sort of bomb
and then he becomes a terrorist.
I know it sounds extremes, but these are extreme,
but these are some of the concerns that people do have.
Um, a lady
who finished her shopping on her way back on a lovely sunny
day, um, in her mobility scooter,
occupants in a car pull up beside her
and throw live fireworks at her.
She said it only lasted for 30 seconds,
but she said she was absolutely terrified.
'cause there was no way she could pre protect herself,
nothing she could do.
Um, a couple sitting in, in their lounge watching tv,
hear a thump at the door and they open the door
and there's this German Shepherd
who just races down their hallway into the bathroom
and starts flooring at the wall trying to get out.
Um, just an absolute panic and distress.
And they ring, the neighbor said, your dog is over here.
And they were like, how did she get out?
And they came over,
but it took them some time to be able to get the dog out
of the house and calm the dog down.
I mean, it just kind of goes on and on.
Um, native birds up at Lake Virginia at this time
of the year are nesting.
So fireworks start going off
and often the birds will leave, the nest will leave,
their chicks, will leave their eggs and not come back.
Mm-hmm. Um, so, you know,
there is also other impacts.
Obviously there are impacts on our environment,
on Native bird life, wildlife, um, injury to children.
I spoke to an ex nurse who said she used
to work in Middlemore Hospital.
Pediatric wards used to be full of children with half blown
or fingers eye injuries to rather severe ones.
Um, you know, the stress on our first responders,
particularly fire emergency, we had I think six call outs
due to fireworks last year in Whanganui.
Um, so these are all things that really concern us
and have an impact on our community
and in our, our our society,
especially when things are pretty, you know,
challenging at times already
and you add this burden of worrying about a pet you love
or horse you love or anything, um, that you value, um,
being impacted by fireworks.
Um, we had, uh, the horsing community really got
behind this petition.
Um, the injuries to horses,
the horrific bull deaths at three horses endured last year.
Thankfully, I haven't heard of one this year,
but, you know, Remi up in the bay of Plenty trying
to get away from fireworks, ran through a fence,
ripped off his whole front ho.
Um, and the owner talks of, I can never unsee
what I've seen and never not know the extreme pain
and suffering Remi went through.
I cannot begin to explain how I feel right now,
but it is more important.
But it is more than heartbreaking.
It is soul destroying if you have pets, you know, the love,
the time, the investment, the care, the nurturing, um,
the financial investment.
We have a dog called Cheeky.
We think we should have called her cha-ching
because we've taken to the vet so many times,
but it is what it is, and you'll do anything for your pets
because they are a valued member of your family.
So my submission is mainly around animal welfare,
but that's not to take away any of the impact of other,
of the environment of the first responders, any of that.
Um, and I just plea with you as a committee
to make something happen, to introduce legislation.
So I can take this petition from Nu, I can go to the council
and say, you now have the backing of the Parliament.
You can do something to make,
to ban fireworks in, in our region.
Um, so thank you for submitting your members Bill.
Jenny, it's, um, it's, it's promising
that things are gonna happen this time round,
and I think I've done my favor.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. I hope there's not too many questions.
We've got time for a couple of questions. Uh, uh, Jenny,
Thank you. Um, the,
the stats show that 63% around that, um,
of people of homes, families have a companion animal.
Um mm-hmm. For you, um, obviously you treat that animal
as a member of the family.
Mm-hmm. What do you say to people that don't have that,
whether you call it a spiritual bond
or a sort of a loving bond with their animal that, you know,
animals are just animals to them.
What do you say to them when you, when you in relation
to banning fireworks? Well,
I don't, I dunno if I mentioned that we're over 2000
of local residents
and rape payers that's signed our community.
And many of them, well, a number
of them, I wouldn't say many.
They didn't have pets, but they had a, you know, a brother
or a, a sister who did,
and they saw the impact that, you know,
fireworks would have on on them.
So, and I think this was the lovely thing.
It it connects people, it connects the community.
Nobody wants to see Native Birds leaving the nest.
Um, nobody wants to see harm done to horses.
Nobody wants to see companion animal animals impacted
by fireworks either.
I'm not sure if I'm answering your question clearly enough,
Jenny, but I think, um, that is why we need, um,
you know, more and more submitters
and petitions done until, you know, we actually get
to a point where legislation is introduced.
So if something doesn't happen this
year, I'll be back next year.
And that's a promise to
Well, I've got time for one more quick one.
Got it. Thank you so much for the mahi
that you've been doing and getting out into community
to make this a public conversation.
Yes. I,
I just remember being little kid
and, um, our dog, one of us kids would always have to go
and snuggle them in the cupboard to, um, during fireworks
and it was, it was, it was awful.
Yes. Um, so thank you for sharing those stories.
Now we've got three petitions all around the same topic.
Yeah. Which is a really exciting thing to be, um, having
because it's extending that public conversation.
So, have you had a chance to talk
with the other petitioners,
and we've heard from, um, Natalie from Animates
and they talked about that compromise.
What is your bottom line?
Like, do you have that compromise that we can still use, um,
fireworks at Maki
or, um, are you thinking ban at all?
I don't think, I think they've actually banned
the fireworks use of mat.
Mm-hmm. Although, don't quote me on that
because of the environment, um, issues, the environment.
Um, also I think speaking culturally, now
that you bring it up, I think, you know,
November the sixth is par haka day.
Um, so that would be a far better kind of thing
to acknowledge and, um,
and will celebrate for want
of a better work than a an outdated, antiquated, you know,
um, Western tradition bought in you, you know, from six,
the 16th century or something.
So, um, yeah, I I just think there's, sorry,
I, sorry, what was your question? That's all
Good. Just work like
we've got three different positions.
Sorry, we're gonna have keep we've
gonna have to keep pause Mr.
She, so just quickly Absolutely.
Just the bottom line of like bottom
Line, do you want them banned completely?
Yeah, I would personally, yes.
Yeah, but I, and I'm here to represent the petitioners
that signed this, and there were a, a few that said
that they would, they would support a one off event,
you know, that was obviously managed
and regulated and safely done.
Um, and so that owners had time to prepare their, you know,
animals for the evening and make sure they were safe
and inside, et cetera, et cetera.
So. Alright. Look, well thank you very much.
Thank, thank you, uh, for coming all the way down from
and also for a, um, very unique submission
and uh, thank you.
Your dog there is very memorable. Yeah, she
Has.
I, I can't believe, um, just interject, um,
may I have two minutes at the end, um, to speak
to my citizens initiated referendum, um, the end of
No, I'm, I'm, I didn't Know about this.
I'm being really, I, I'm sorry,
but no, we'll just have to, um,
but there may be an opportunity later.
No worries. Uh, given correspondence with us
and we can, uh, there's always, I just randomly here today.
Thank you. Um, right.
So we'll hear from, um,
Suzanne Cook J just for that person.
This is not the end of this,
so there will be an opportunity later on,
so if you correspond with us.
Thank you. Uh, so Suzanne is on Zoom.
We have her.
Alright, so, uh, the clerk is asking, can you unmute,
we haven't got you on screen yet.
Ah, here we are. Suzanne,
modern Communications are with us.
So now have you been able to hear what's happened so far?
No, we, we can't hear you.
Have you got, I think you are still on mute.
No, we're still,
no, no, we're still
could come back to your, well
just give it a Marcus given
you our main, I'd quite like
to hear from you if we can get it working.
Can you not have, is that, that's not our end,
that's definitely, definitely Suzanne's end,
or we might just have to go offline
and get you back, Suzanne.
Alright. Okay. I'll just, I'll I'll leave that.
Uh, you just work that through
and let us know when we've, uh, fixed that problem.
Um, we'll go now to, um, James York, um, from
Bad Boy Fireworks.
We got,
he's coming in on Zoom,
James?
Yeah, I do. Oh good. Got, got your sound there.
Have you heard, um, the submissions up until now?
Yes, I'm also joined today, um,
by a fellow supporter from Blue Brothers Fireworks, Stephen.
Okay, welcome Steve. So, alright, so we've,
we've had your correspondence.
Um, we've got, uh, 10 minutes. So the floor is yours.
We would like to push the traditional aspect, uh,
that it is a long kiwi tradition, uh, having Guy forks, uh,
the, I would call it the silent majority
of Kiwis do celebrate Guy folks.
Um, last estimate was that around at least one third
of households actually purchased fireworks and celebrate it.
Uh, that wasn't done over all the importers sales figures,
only a few of them.
So we actually think it's closer to 50%.
Um, there's other cultural significance to do
with Ali Chinese New Year, uh,
and it's Ali's growing,
the Indian population in New Zealand is actually growing,
uh, and they love fireworks.
It is a big thing for them and their culture.
Um, then obviously there's economic benefits.
There's a lot of people that sell fireworks, uh,
around the entire country.
You're talking hundreds
and hundreds of people that are involved.
Um, not just that we raise a lot of money
for different charities around the country, um,
all different types and it's money that a lot
of them tell us they cannot raise anywhere else other
than selling fireworks.
Yeah, so it's fundraising groups.
Um, a lot of thing, a lot
of the time people bring up about public displays replacing
retail fireworks.
The fact is public displays, if anything,
there's getting less of them.
And the reason for that is no one will fund them.
So Auckland Council is a great example.
They used to put on a number of big displays on the harbor,
for example, in Auckland.
Now they don't do it because if they do do it,
people complain that they're,
they're wasting rate payers money on putting
on a firework display.
So it's a catch 22 when it comes to that.
Um, public displays as well.
Um, I'd also like to point out a few a CC figures.
There are more, there's three times as many people
that get a CC claims for a hot water bottle
as there are for fireworks.
There's four times as many for barbecue injuries
Um, one of your submitters just
before said about making a bomb from fireworks,
that's a ridiculous idea, um, that
you could go into any supermarket
and get far worse things than what you get out of firework.
Um, Maki also came up, um,
and your previous submitters said
that they're banned at Maki.
That is not the case. There's actually several organizations
that do a lot of firework displays at Mai still.
Um, some people are opposed to it,
but a lot of, um, a lot of people actually still do it.
Um, and yeah, that is the sort of main point
and I'd like to, uh, answer any questions that you would've.
Yes, sure. Okay. Um, members Greg
Fleming. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you very much.
Um, how do you respond to the, uh, the concerns
and the stories that you've heard, uh, shared
around animal welfare?
The animal welfare thing is always, I mean, yes,
we admit fireworks can scare animals, that is true,
but a the majority of people use them properly sensibly.
And I think it gets blown a lot out
of proportion considering the actual number of fireworks
that are used around the country.
And I mean, we are animal people ourselves.
We have horses, we have, you know, cats, dogs,
everything in our family, and we
know what it's what it's about.
And yes, they can get scared because of fireworks.
Um, but yeah, I would say that that's not as,
it reaches headlines when something happens.
But at the same time, like horses, we have horses,
horses run through fences from anything every day.
We had one that ran through a horse
because of the noise that the cover was making on it.
Um, it does happen for a variety of reasons,
I think. Sorry,
am I able to make a comment? Um, sure.
I think, I think the, the, um, not the sudden noises
and things like that, animals in general,
whether their horses or cats or dogs
or whatever, um, that can be caused by, you know,
thunder, lightning, um,
allowed motorbike going past your house or whatever.
But, um, but yeah, just, just the point on, um, the,
you know, the, the animals, um, getting impacted.
I mean, that's, that is, that is a risk,
but, um, there are also, um, you know,
many other risks out there in day-to-day life as well.
Um, what would you, um, what would you look at as in terms
of a compromise of so restricting the, the use?
So continuing to allow retail sale of fireworks, uh,
but restricting the use of fireworks
to a few days of the year as well.
Um, so that animal, uh, owners
and tenders could, could, would know that it was just, say,
one week of the year that they were gonna
have to deal with this issue.
I, I think that they could bring in restrictions
for time limits, like no fireworks after 10:00 PM at night
and actually force it.
Uh, maybe with the exception of New Year's Eve, um,
you could do certain days of the year
or a week, say Guy Forks
and maybe for Ally, which has
actually become a big thing Chinese New Year, et cetera.
Um, there could definitely be more
restrictions on that side of things.
Okay. And what about restricting
who can buy the fireworks?
I think it would be very hard to place that.
And, you know what I mean, the, the
Existing restrictions in place are
already, you have to be 18.
So it's no different to buying cigarettes or vapes
or alcohol at the moment.
Yeah. Thank you.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for your submission today.
Um, you mentioned, uh, that the silent majority, um,
like to use fireworks.
I suggest perhaps they're not so silent
and the percussive nature
of fireworks is actually the issue.
Mm-hmm. Um, but one
of the things I'm really interested in is in terms
of the products that you sell, what's the highest level per,
um, mg of pyrotechnic substance, um,
in those fireworks you're selling?
Could you tell us a bit about your product?
So the New Zealand 40
of composition within a firework, uh,
it's very strict. Sorry, can you just
Start, start that again. Sorry.
You just cut out at the start of that.
Sorry. Um, in New Zealand you're allowed 40 grams
of composition in your fireworks.
So they're very small fireworks.
Um, most of the world, like America for example,
they have a 500 gram limit in most states.
Most of Europe has a 1000 gram limit.
Um, so in real terms,
we have basically the smallest fireworks in the world.
And does that answer your question?
Um, is some fireworks appear louder than others?
What, what's that about? Can you tell me about the,
the technical aspects of that?
Because some of them, uh, create a louder boom sound.
Um, and, um, any limits on, on
what DB levels?
So there is a 90 db limit on the fireworks, uh,
and there is a whole code of practice currently set up,
which is around how the fireworks are tested.
Um, basically like some fireworks yes,
will be not as loud as others.
Some are gonna be fountain, some are,
there's a whole variety of things.
Um, there's literally thousands
of different types of fireworks.
Kda, I bet you guys are fun at parties.
Hey, um, I am really interested in,
we've been talking a lot about animal welfare.
I'm really interested in actually the supply chain
and that focus on ethically sourced fireworks
and like protecting people from modern day slavery.
Is that something that you guys do track your supply chain?
Yes, we know exactly. We go to the factories where all
of the fireworks come out of, um, believe it
or not, the firework market
because it is such a,
you would call it like a dangerous industry
when it comes to manufacturing.
It's actually a very highly paid industry, um, when it comes
to, in China compared
to most industries like your
cell phone or something like that.
So the actual factories are very nice places.
Um, and yeah, there's,
It's Nothing to sort of think about there.
Thank you. That's a great Question.
Alright, any other questions? Um, from members?
Alright, thank you.
And uh, I know the, uh, can I just say address?
We, we did, when we were putting, um, looking for people
to come and submit, um, we did actually look
for someone from the industry.
You haven't got an industry body, have you?
No, we have an informal industry group.
Um, but yeah, no, no industry body as such.
Alright. Okay. Thank you. Thank
You, thank You.
Right now how did we go with Suzanne?
She stepped on
There. Wouldn't be a good session
if
someone didn't have trouble with the it.
All right, Suzanne, can we try again?
No. Yeah, hold on.
It's on a computer.
Alright, well look,
it looks like we might have to have another go.
We'll keep moving and we'll keep going.
We, we'll get you Suzanne.
I, uh, you may, you may be our last,
but uh, we'll, uh, we'll,
we'll make sure we get on, get to you.
Otherwise we could always do it by phone if that's possible.
Um, if, um, we're not gonna do any good with, uh,
the Zoom right now, the Ministry of Environment in person
Mm, this will be good.
Alright, it's good. You've, uh,
you've, you've seen the drill.
Um, we've got your submissions
and look forward to hearing from you
and hopefully time for questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, committee,
uh, uh, good afternoon.
My name's Glen Wiley.
I'm a general manager for Waste
and has no act policy administrative of the environment.
And with me, I've got Sarah Kimmit
who manages the hazardous substances, um, policy team
and Tim Bennett, ment advisor in the team.
I'm gonna briefly run through what our roles
and responsibilities are, and that'll be EPA.
Also talk about what's in and outer scope of the regulations
and, uh, respond to concerns about the effectiveness
of those regulations that have been raised by petitioners.
And if we've got time, talk through some
of their key monitoring trends that we are seeing.
Uh, but the data that we are tracking from police things in
a CC, so people might ask what ministry
of the environment is doing at the committee.
So we administer the has no act and the regulations.
Um, hazardous substances,
fireworks regulations sit under the, under the has no act
and they govern the sale importation and packaging
and fireworks in New Zealand.
So our main role is to administer those regulations
or talk about what they cover shortly.
We also, um, collect
and report on the impacts of, uh, retail fireworks use, um,
which covers fires, injuries and public disturbances.
And we provide briefings, uh, to administer based on
that the data and also select committee, et cetera.
Uh, the EPA plays an important implementation role in the,
in the fireworks regulations.
So they approve the certifiers who ensure that fireworks,
uh, meet the safety standards before sale.
They issue the import certificates for fireworks that, uh,
confirm compliance with the reg with the,
uh, regulation requirements.
They set requirements for labeling
and packaging of fireworks
and they provide, um,
public guidance on safe handling and storage.
So the regulations themselves, what is regulated,
I think the committee is probably aware of this, uh,
the sale period and age restriction.
Um, these were initially introduced in 2001
with a 10 day sale period, which was reduced
to a four day sale period in 2007.
And, uh, originally a age, retail age purchase of 14
that was increased to 18 in in 2007.
The regulations also cover certification and classification
and a number of the issues that were raised
by the previous submitter around, um, noise, et cetera.
Uh, and also there's enforcement powers for police, uh,
under the, under the has no act.
What isn't covered is, um, the way that individuals,
uh, use the fireworks,
including when and where they're discharged.
So, you know, you've heard that there's a restriction
around the time period, but people can use
fireworks any time through the year.
Uh, the way that people's storage and handle fires
after purchase is, is not regulated
nor an animal welfare impacts noise
or environmental effects.
Um, local restrictions on public land use isn't covered
by government's regulations,
but handled by councils, uh, via about via bylaws.
Uh, so we don't, we don't have a role in regulating
or enforcing use of fireworks and private property.
Um, or there's currently no mandate to restrict the use
outside that retails, uh, sale period.
Um, responding
to concerns about the regulatory of effectiveness.
So obviously you've heard concerns, um,
from number petitioners
that the current regulations don't adequately control,
uh, the use of fireworks.
The ministry acknowledges, acknowledges these concerns
and offers the following clarification.
So as I've touched on, the regulations aren't designed
to control the use of the fireworks.
Their scope is limited to the,
the sale, uh, and importation.
So use related impacts such as noise, animal distress,
and antisocial behaviors, uh,
outside the ministries regulatory mandate
and are assessed through other mechanisms like,
like local bylaws or summary offenses act.
The enforcement of the misuse is primarily the
responsibility of the police.
Um, so our key role is continuing to monitor the TR trends
and provide evidence, uh, to inform future decisions.
But we, we haven't advocated, uh, for or against private use
unless directed by government.
And, uh, any work in
that area is currently not on the
government, uh, work program.
So if you were wanting to expand regulatory scope
to include use, you'd require, um, change in those, um,
regulations and potentially even in in legislations.
Um, model of and reporting trends.
We've got a lot of data here,
but I was looking at it, um, this morning.
Um, in general, we peaked in effects around 2005
and 2006 in the two years before the, the 2007 adjustments.
So around that time you were looking at it, uh,
just over 600 fires, um, call out, uh, fires per year.
There's been a general, uh, decrease down, um,
since 2007 down to about a hundred.
Um, we, which is where we were at in uh, 2021
and 20 23, 20 22, we actually got below a hundred.
However, the last two years there has been an increase,
um, uh, back up again.
So in the 2024 year, uh, we had 166 fires as
as mentioned by the, um, uh, mates petitioner.
So I, you know, overall the mega trend is it has,
has, has dropped down.
There's some variability I think,
which probably depends on the weather
on the, on, on the night.
Um, but that just gives you an overview
of the overall trend.
But we've got a lot more data if you are wanting
to understand, uh, and, and see all that.
Um, for example, a CC claims have dropped in numbers,
however the claim costs are increasing.
So it's, you can look at the data in a, in a number of ways.
So that's the end of our, um, discussion
and we're here to ask any questions that you might have.
Oh, thank you. So one question.
So there's no specific offense related
to the use of firearms.
It's would've to be fireworks suck on it, fire, um,
fireworks, um, it's, um, all pertains to other, you'd have
to use other parts of the criminal justice system. Yeah.
Yeah. I was reading in the media this morning about police
arresting people overnight, for example,
with some activity in Eden.
So that would be the, that's the, you know,
they would've used their police powers. Yeah. Yeah.
Alright, thank you. Um, Jenny Markoff.
Thank you. Um, so yearly you report to the minister, um,
on the, the latest, the previous year's data.
Yeah. Have you reported 2020 four's data Yes.
To the minister yet? Yes. And when was that?
Um, just last week,
So, so last week. Yeah. So
there is an update now? Yeah, there is. Yeah.
Um, and when will that be released publicly?
Um, we don't traditionally release it publicly.
It normally comes out through OAS and, and so forth,
but, um, you know, that's all the information could be
provided to the committee if they're
interested in seeing it.
Yeah. And, and so you normally would relate, uh, uh,
update or brief the minister Yeah.
Previous year's data? Yeah. Just prior to correct
that particular, yeah.
Okay. Thank you for that. Um, uh, you, when you talk about,
um, where, where the regulations, uh,
and relating to um, all the other parts of it, the use side
of it, uh, have you ever made any recommendations
to the minister about changing those regs?
Not in, uh, 10 years
or so that I've been involved in it,
that I can recall too many. Not as far as I can
Remember. And, and would that,
what, what would you need
to see other than a directive from a
minister to look at this issue?
What would you have to see in the data to make
that recommendation to a minister?
Well, we, we are very much focused on, on providing,
on providing the data so that, that has,
that has been our main, um, focus.
You know, if there was, you know,
potentially an extreme event, you know, of some sort that,
you know, ministers might ask
questions, why did this happen?
We would potentially, you know, give advice, um,
find out a bit more about that.
But we, we don't have a threshold
or anything around what would we would use
to provide a separate piece of advice. Okay.
Yep. Thank you. Alright. No other questions members?
Can I just ask that? Yes. Kda, thank you for being here.
Do you have any data on how this affects native wildlife,
particularly our manu?
No, I don't think we do. Do we?
We we rely very much on a CC, uh, police
and fe through our data sources.
So we don't have, uh, any of other data sources.
Can I just do one secondary? No problem.
And do you, do you know how many complaints are made?
Yeah, we do. Well there's different types of complaints.
We do know how many, uh,
complaints come into our minister's office, for example.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and also police, uh, also record the number of complaints
that they receive
and then they actually do, do analysis on those complaints
about which ones they have found out to be
as a consequence of fireworks.
Yeah, sure. Yeah.
Alright. Okay, look, thank you.
And you mentioned, uh, fins.
I think we have about fins table. Thank you.
And thank you very much
Mr.
Nay. Floor is yours. 10 minutes.
Uh, Koto and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name's Adrian Nay and I'm the acting Community Readiness
and Recovery National Manager at Fire
and Emergency New Zealand.
As outlined in our submission, it is the position of fire
and emergency New Zealand that the retail sale of fireworks
for public use poses a significant
and unacceptable risk public safety
to our personnel and the environment.
The risk is fundamentally at odds with our core mission
to reduce the incidents of unwanted fire to protect life
and property and to prevent or limit injury
and damage to land and the environment.
Each year, fire and emergency undertakes extensive efforts
to remote the safe use of fireworks.
We encourage the public
to attend organized pub public displays,
which are generally well managed and safer for all involved.
For those who choose to use fireworks privately,
we consistently urge caution and responsibility.
Our public safety campaigns span advertising,
social media outreach, community engagement,
and media partnerships,
all aimed raising awareness and reducing harm.
The brave efforts of our firefighters across the country
also limit the harm and damage caused by fires started
by fireworks as they respond to fires in their communities.
Previous legislative changes have also helped
with the support of communities across New Zealand.
We have made progress in reducing the number
of fireworks related calls over recent years.
Despite these efforts, the reality remains stark.
Our firefighters respond to an average of 170
fireworks related fires Annually,
though we believe the true number
of fires is significantly higher.
These incidents range from last range,
from large scale vegetation fires that burn for days
and devastate communities, environments
and ecosystems to chaotic nights
where our communication centers are inundated with calls
and our crews are dispatched to multiple simultaneous
incidents across the country.
Just this week we've witnessed the devastating consequences
of fireworks related fires,
including a family losing their home and possessions.
And these are not isolated events.
They're part of a predictable
and recurring pattern that places lives, property,
and our environment at risk.
Ultimately, our advocacy for a ban on the retail sale
of fireworks stems from our fundamental, fundamental mission
to protect lives, property and the environment from the risk
and harm of fire.
It is for these reasons that fire
and emergency New New Zealand supports the petitions being
considered by this committee today.
We believe that a ban on the retail sale of fireworks
to the public is necessary
and proportionate to step up to protect our communities.
By removing the source of risk,
we can significantly reduce the number of preventable fires
and injuries and better safeguard our people
property and the environment.
In closing, I want to acknowledge the tireless efforts
of our firefighters
and communication center staff who respond
with professionalism, courage in the face
of these avoidable com avoidable emergencies.
But we must do more than respond.
We must prevent an a ban on retail sale of fireworks
as a critical step in that direction.
Many thanks for your time. I'm happy to take any questions.
Alright, thank you. And one question, um,
obviously your statistics be around the fires
and the damage to property largely.
Do you keep any statistics around animal, um,
where animals are injured
or do you have any collection data around that?
We don't. We would have some if we were called
to like large animal rescues, which is one
of the duties that we perform.
We might have some data on that, but not generally.
Um, also just on the, the data we, um,
my colleagues from the Ministry of the environment mentioned
a dip over recent years that was due
to some industrial action from the Professional firefighters
union when they weren't recording data for a period.
Um, but we do expect
that it probably has been quite steady over the last years.
Alright, thank you. Um, Kylie, thank
You. Um,
so I'm from the Greens
and we've been calling for this firework public firework
band for a long time.
Is that the same for you? Have you been calling for this
for a long time and have you there been other iterations
of petitions and public discourse around this?
I had a look recently.
2007, our, um, predecessor Chief Executive
and National Commander Mike Hole, made a submission calling
for a ban on the retail side of fireworks.
So it has been around for some time. Yeah.
Um, there was a submission, I believe
to this committee made several years ago.
Thank You. Oh, thank you chairman.
Um, so thank you very much.
This submission, both written and, and, and
or, um, so your focus is on the banning the,
the retail sale,
but you've, you are clearly, um, supportive of, uh, of,
of a community
gatherings a public gathering for the license.
So are you imagining that there would be a,
a legal mechanism for importing fireworks?
So the, the restriction would then be on
who was able to purchase those?
Is that what you have? This, this may be well too far
outside of your lane, but
I'm just interested in your thoughts on it.
Now that we have public displays at the moment
and they don't cause us too many problems,
that happens occasionally, but on the
whole they're reasonably
Okay. And
So they don't have to apply for a permit.
There's no, they do, they do from, from
No, from WorkSafe I believe manage that
as part of their main mandate.
But we do work with WorkSafe
and uh, um, the people that put on those displays.
Okay. So that's what you'd be going for is to, is
to simply have those, and that way you regulate
who sets them off, where it happens and when it happens.
Yeah. And the weather, the conditions,
which is obviously the big thing for us, you
and the firefighting supplies that are on.
Alright. Jenny Would, one of the biggest issues that,
um, animal owners and,
and I'm a horse mother, I've got three horses, uh, is
that it's that unplanned, um, randomness
of when fireworks go off
and if you would, if you want
to support a ban on the retail sale.
But would all, would it also necessary in terms
of the use side of it, be a requirement to notify?
Um, so if you're having a community gathering
that you actually are required by law
to notify the community, so,
and actually gets some sort of notice.
Is, is that a step too far?
I mean, what are your thoughts on that?
Uh, I'm not too sure. It's not,
we haven't really considered into that side of
It. Okay. Okay.
Then just one question back
to from my final one, back to, um, large animal rescue.
Um, have you, uh, can you speak
to any time FES has been called out, uh, for a,
for a large animal rescue when it's, uh,
the animal's been injured by fireworks?
I can't, sorry, it's not data I have right now,
but we'd be happy to have a look
and provide that to, to the committee if that's you.
Yeah. Okay.
Alright. No other questions. Thank you very much.
Pleasure. Thank you. Very informative.
Um, New Zealand Veterinary Association.
I think we have them via Zoom.
Sorry, I've just promoted.
Oh, okay. Well, so if we've got, uh, we'll have another,
uh, Suzanne Cook, sorry for, uh, veterinary Association.
We've just been one of our submitters.
We've been trying to get the technology rights to come in
and it looks like we're gonna have another go at that.
Hello? Ah,
now we, we can't see you, Suzanne. We can hear you.
Oh, okay. I'll, I'll proceed.
I'll just, um, I'll see if I can get,
We've certainly got your voice clearly, so start anyway.
If we can get you, if we can get you on screen,
it'll be even an added bonus.
Um, Um,
Sorry, I just haven't used, um, zoom for very long.
Uh, oh, there I am. Look,
We're, look, we, we've got you. Yeah.
Right. Okay. Kiri.
It's not a bad thing. We're getting, we we're,
we've lost our zoom skills.
Thank you for, um, allowing me to speak.
Um, I became involved in the process, um,
and started a petition primarily
because I had a, um, I had a really bad concussion.
And, um, when the firework went off a couple of years ago,
I just, um, I was actually driven by balmy by the noise.
And, uh, and then I went to my horse paddock
and we had three nights of hell where a lot
of rural people were living off fireworks.
And this was actually something quite new to me.
Rural people didn't generally let fireworks off.
Um, you know, it's just something
that I guess has changed over the years as we have, uh,
doubled the population perhaps.
And, um, all living on smaller, smaller sites.
So, um, look, I've enjoyed fireworks.
I've gone to, you know,
the Warriors opening game many years ago,
and the, the pyrotechnics were as quite spectacular.
But I also went to an all black game, I think it was
around 2014, where there was an issue
with the pyrotechnic display,
and a few people suffered, um, quite serious burns.
Um, I did note in one of the, uh, statements from, uh,
WorkSafe and their correspondence
that quality control can be an issue when fireworks
come from overseas.
Um, I'm not quite sure what's, uh, what's involved in, um,
you know, the making of a firework.
I did try and take a pragmatic approach to my submission,
so it was all encompassing,
but the composition of fireworks wasn't one of them.
Um, what I did find when I commenced research was
that there was legislation around the selling of fireworks,
but there's no nationwide legislation
about the setting off of them.
Um, I'm guessing that central government leave it
to local government because there's 78 councils
around the mahu and they all have different fire bans.
Um, what's happening in central Atago might be completely
different to what's happening in Northland.
Um, which again, it can be an issue
because there's no, you've gotta keep things fairly simple.
I think you, you know, there's no hard and fast rules.
So, um, the people who don't have as much common sense
as, as normal people will then just think, well,
I can let them off wherever.
Like, I like, um,
whenever I, like, I also found there was no agency
that actually collates data on animal trauma injuries
and deaths or even human trauma.
Um, A CC obviously deals with physical injuries, injuries
that need, um, need, uh, medical attention,
but the death of a pet, a dog, a horse, um, the trauma
that you suffer as a human, um, which is wholly preventable,
uh, you know, there's, there's nothing there
to collate that data.
Um, I did include some supplementary, um, info
that I sent through last night.
Um, the first is from Friends of Remy who did a,
who did actually collate some human animal injuries
and property damage data.
Um, and there's some comments from some of the submitters.
One person, um, was asleep
and their house actually caught on
fire and burnt to the ground.
It was a fairly new house.
Um, there's a letter from New Zealand dogs,
which used to be the Kennel Club.
Um, that's in support of a ban on fireworks.
And there's an acoustic report from Massey University from
around 2014, which goes into a lot of detail on, uh,
the testing and decibel, uh,
testing the decibel level of fireworks.
Um, because in my question to one
of the government departments, it's, it was,
can you give me the last 10 years of data on
the decibel range and the pyrotechnic testing results?
Because my understanding is there's a random sample of 10,
um, fireworks taken from a consignment.
Um, but they said that wasn't available.
They didn't believe anyone had the data, um,
and that no results were available.
So that was a little bit worrying
because, um, I'm told
that it's a very heavily regulated industry, um,
being hazardous materials
and that, um, there should be test results.
Um, it should be noted in the last
select committee hearing back in 2019 that, um,
local government New Zealand presented, and they did a vote.
63% of councils around the motto voted
to have private fireworks banned.
Um, there's legislation written
to protect animals from injury
and being able to show normal behavior, which of course,
when you've got 190 decibel
fireworks going off in an adjacent paddock, um,
they can't show normal behavior.
They're, they're running scared.
I did note that legislation has been written so
that fireworks can't be, um, lit at rodeos.
So there was some common sense there.
Um, pyrotechnics, um, there's very few rules.
The rules appear to have been written by WorkSafe, um,
mostly around the safety of the workers.
So they want to wear headphone, uh, headgear, obviously
to protect their hearing.
Um, there's a rule
that there's no captive animals within 200 meters,
but if you've got 120 decibel fireworks going off
120 decibels 200 meters, it's not a lot of,
um, not a lot of leeway.
It should be more like five kilometers.
Um, there's actually no mandatory
public notification either.
So we've had a few events out in Northwest Auckland
where pyrotechnic testings happened
and, um, we, you know, a lot
of us horse owners don't actually live on site,
so we are not in our paddocks.
We don't know when this is happening.
So it's, um, it's something that, again,
is wholly preventable.
If there was mandatory public notification, um,
yeah, I'm sure if, if there was a ban on fireworks, I mean,
entrepreneurs, they pivot
and, um, I'm sure they can find a,
an alternative income source
and one that doesn't cause such misery.
Um, and the last thing I just wanted
to mention was, um, well, actually two things I wanted
to mention where to from here.
So when I did all my research, I thought,
well, what is the answer?
Um, low sound fireworks. That way we can still have our fun.
It's not gonna scare native birds, horses,
dogs won't be so traumatized.
You still would have the fire risk,
but you'd still have, you know, the firework fun.
Um, Kate, could you have it on one night?
Only because it used to be November the fifth.
Why we actually celebrate something from 420
years ago in another country?
I don't understand. But, um, it used to be one night only.
So, um, obviously it's not gonna stop the fires.
Um, I, in one of my, uh,
correspondence, um, one of the mps pointed out
that there's a group who was trying to force a, um,
public referendum.
My understanding of that is they have to get 10%
of the population to sign, um, by manual means only.
The legislation that's currently written in law means
that you cannot collect digital signatures.
So if you want to try and get out there
and collect those many signatures manually, um,
that's a huge, huge task.
So I would say to you that
we have a general election next year,
put it in a binding referendum question, do you want
private sales of fireworks banned?
Would you agree with having
licensed operators running public
displays in urban centers only?
I note that the stuff, stuff did a poll this morning, um,
asking the public what they thought,
and it's currently running at 82% want firework expand.
Thank you. Any questions?
Alright, thank you as well.
Worth waiting for, uh, Ms. Cook.
Um, questions members, uh, Greg Fleming,
Curtis, Suzanne. Suzanne, nice
to see you. I appreciate our correspondence.
Uh, the, just a a a question that I've asked, um, some
of the other submitters as well, I'm sure whether you heard
that, but I'm just interested in all the focus seems
to be on the retail sales rather on the use,
and most people seem to be, uh, supportive of the idea.
We're still gonna have fireworks in this country
and they're gonna be for public licensed events.
Um, I find it hard to imagine that some
of those fireworks aren't gonna find them,
find their way into the hands of, uh, mortals, uh,
and they're going to let off those fireworks.
So would you also be looking for legislation that, uh,
made a defense to, for a non-licensed person
to set off fireworks?
Yes, absolutely. I think if you're gonna make a clear
mandate that, um, licensed operators running displays,
you know, public displays only,
or at, say, events like an All Blacks game or,
or, you know, um, warriors game, um, you know,
people love those sorts of pyrotechnic displays.
So yeah, no, absolutely, but not the general public.
I think it's sort of batshit crazy
that we allow 18 year olds to have explosives.
I mean, you know, over social media in the past few days
there's been fire aimed at police, there's been,
you know, so many fires.
Um, you know,
and they, they always describe it as scrub land.
I'm like, that was actually native bush.
It wasn't scrub land.
Oh, oh no, tell us, tell us what it was.
Um, the 200 hectares
that were burned in Christchurch in 2022, um,
the two lads got referred to youth aid.
Um, I do wonder whether it's ignorance,
maybe they just didn't know they weren't allowed
to light them at the beach.
Um, because, you know, let's face it,
in life nowadays there's a lot of rules.
So, um, yeah,
I just think it's safer just to ban them there.
There's just been so much, so much trauma from, you know,
as I say, when I collated the data in my submission, um,
I realized it was also human impact.
Um, one lady has got a neurodiverse child
and she just said it's gone on for eight weeks
and she's just at the end of her tether.
So, um, you know, Wellington council,
less Wellington council, but they have a, um,
written in their, um, bylaws to not let them off at a time
that causes stress.
So, um, to the,
to the person putting down their three month old twins
to the person that's about to get up at 11 o'clock
to start a night shift, I mean, what time do you
let your fireworks off?
Um, maybe there could be hard and fast rules, I don't know.
But it still wouldn't stop the fires.
So, um, the only thing I can think of
after looking at a lot of information over a year,
I've sort of analyzed everything.
Um, I can only think that you can ban them
public displays only so people can still enjoy fireworks.
Right. Um, uni markoff, um, you seem to be connected
to the equestrian community.
Yes. What, um, what is the predominant, uh,
voice coming through there around, uh, this issue?
Um,
Not being able to plan
because they just go off at random times.
So that's why when I first looked at providing options,
because again, I looked at all the staff
and I thought, well, I don't wanna just say ban fireworks,
I want to actually put out some options there.
And I thought, well, could it just be the 5th of November?
You only have the issue then as
to whether if we've had a Tinder dry month, that
that could also, um,
impact on our firefighters being called out to
numerous fires on one night.
So for the community of equestrians, it's people who turn up
and light their fires in a rural area next
to a horse paddock
because they're not lighting them at home.
They've, you know, with, with the horse Remy that died, um,
the fireworks were lit in the rural area,
Remy should have been safe in her paddock at home.
So it's, it's the randomness of
not knowing when they're gonna go off.
Um, and you know, they are so loud,
they're so loud nowadays.
I'd love to see the testing results say that they're
below 90 decibels.
Yes, yes. Because I actually don't believe it, frankly.
Alright, look, thank you very much
and as I said, John, well worth waiting for.
Um, we've got a couple more submitters.
You're very welcome to remain on.
I think it's been quite serendipitous that, uh, we,
we've put you, um, in where we have in, in the midst of it.
So thank you very much.
Thank you. Right. Uh, veterinary association again.
Got you online.
Alright,
Ms. Murphy, right?
We, you, we've got you now
Is the, is the NZVA, is Kristen here as well?
We've got anyone else there?
Uh, I have been promoted to a panelist,
but I'm, I'm not representing the
New Zealand Vet Association.
I'm representing veterinarians for animal welfare.
I just wonder if there's been a mix up there.
Oh, okay. So, so Becky, you're with, um, you, you're
with veterinary association, so you go ahead
with your submission and Correct.
But we, we actually have another attendee. Kristen Dwyer.
There she goes. There we go. Right.
I'm here for questions if needed.
Oh, you, you loud and clear. Loud and clear.
So the, the floor is yours.
10 minutes. Um, thank you very much for inviting us
to speak here today on, in an
opportunity to speak on this topic.
Um, my name's Kristen Dwyer.
I am the head of veterinary services
for large animals at the New Zealand Veterinary
Association to Pi KeHE.
And I'm joined by Dr.
Becky Murphy, who's the president
of our New Zealand Companion Animal Committee.
Together we represent nearly 4,000 veterinary professionals
across South Terah as professionals.
We are bound both by science and compassion
and our profession and ethical viewers really come out quite
clearly that the retail sale of fireworks
for the public should cease fireworks,
we believe should be restricted
to only licensed professionally managed public displays.
Approved, approved by local authorities,
and with informed, um, uh, communities around them.
This position is grounded in our experience
and and in evidence.
Every year, veterinary teams, we see the same, uh, types
of distressing patterns, animals that get injured, animals
that are terrified or actually killed as a result of,
um, fireworks.
Regularly we see dogs with severe noise, phobias,
that self-injure from attempts to escape, cats
that go missing or injured after bolting from their homes.
We see horses and livestock crash
through paddocks causing themselves injury
or ending up on public roads.
And we also see wildlife displaced or killed.
Some animals never regain their sense of security
and they can develop long-term anxiety
that requires behavioral and pharmacological management.
For some of these animals, the trauma, trauma can be
so severe that euthanasia is the only humane
option we have left to offer.
The problem isn't only just the noise and the light,
although we've other submitters have identified.
It's really the unpredictability of when, where,
and for how long those fireworks are going to occur.
Under the current rules, members of the publics can buy
and stockpile fireworks, setting them off weeks
or months later, in both urban
and rural settings with no requirement
to notify those that may be affected.
It's that unpredictability that makes it impossible
for owners to provide safe environments for the animals.
As all methods require the owners to prepare
preparation can look like moving animals to safer paddocks
or even to other properties, stabling, horses,
and even medicating anxious animals in advance.
None of these safety measures can be taken once
the fireworks have begun.
Those can only be done beforehand because frightened
or panicked animals can endanger themselves, their owners,
and anyone they come in contact with
without the ability to plan and prepare.
Unscheduled fireworks undermine all the welfare efforts
that we rely on in order to desensitize
and to manage the fear of these animals.
We recognize that celebration and community are important.
Our proposal isn't about ending joy,
it's about managing it responsibly.
Licensed public displays allow everyone
to enjoy fireworks safely with proper notice
and in locations that protect owners,
livestocks pets and wildlife.
Many communities overseas have already made the shift
replacing private fire, private fireworks
with professionally managed displays
or with quieter laser and drone shows.
Our society as veterinarians has a duty under the Animal
Welfare Act 1999 to prevent reasonably avoidable harm
to vice sentine animals.
This means that we are responsible for the care
and the welfare of the animals in our homes,
in our communities, and in our environment.
Continuing to allow the unregulated private sales is
inconsistent with that duty.
On behalf of New Zealand veterinary professionals,
the NZBA asked the committee to ban the retail sales
of fireworks to the public to restrict the use
to only licensed professionally run public displays
with community, um, awareness
and the establishment
of a national reporting on fireworks related incidents,
which involves animals, people, and the environment.
By taking this step, New Zealand can align
with international best practices,
better protect its animals,
and creates safer,
more predictable celebrations for everyone.
Thank you for your time and for your commitment
to furthering community safety and animal welfare.
We welcome any questions you may have.
Alright, thank you. Uh, Jean Markoff,
Thank you very much.
Great submission. Um, are,
are you collating data on animal harm, um,
and incidents through fireworks
On a No, that's local level Or regional level or
No, that's not something because we, um,
the veterinary profession is private.
We don't have a, an ability to collect all of that data.
We do have some studies that have been performed,
but they focus on physical injury
and they don't represent a lot of the, um, psychological
and the behavioral issues that come from fireworks,
which we know is a bigger part of that population and,
and, uh, trouble that we have with them.
So there's a number of treatments that you can, um,
get if you are, you have a cat
or a dog in particular that you know,
you know is gonna have anxiety attacks with, with the next,
you know, round of fire ex coming up,
are you seeing an increase in, um, your clients coming into
the, the practices to request those sorts of treatments?
I'll pass that to Becky. I, I think that, uh,
there probably would be an increase.
Um, I don't work in that area specifically myself,
but, um, as more people are aware of some
of the options available, um, I'm sure
that my colleagues see an increase, um, in those sorts
of inquiries at this time of the year.
Um, they, they, they can work well.
Um, for some animals they don't work quite so well,
but of course, as Kristen's already said, um, they need
to be given quite some time before,
before they actually needed.
So so the night before or the morning before as well.
Um, just to, to boost that effect.
So, uh, if they go off at any time during the year,
we obviously can't, can't do that in advance.
Look, I, I know it's difficult,
but do you see a difference, obviously we've got today,
which is the, the day after guy, Fox Day
and there's bound to be injuries around that.
But what about through the year, you know, where you do get,
you know, your New Year's eve, your,
your unpredictable times, or it might be someone's birthday.
Do, do you see? And, and is it likely that you pick that up?
Like if a horse had bolted, um,
or, um, the sort of traumatic injuries to pets
that we've heard about, would you pick
that up without actually specifically looking for the data?
Uh, we would pick it up if the, if the owners called us.
So certainly if it's a horse, um, that's bolted
through a wire fence, uh,
is more than likely going to have damaged.
Particularly its lower limbs, uh,
and need veterinary attention.
So that's where, from a large animal perspective,
that's when we would become aware of the situation.
Um, and the same for small animals.
If they sought care, emergency care
or care the next day for an injured animal, that's
where we become aware of it,
is when they need medical assistance
or if they're requesting preventative management,
like behavior desensitization
or if they're looking for medications.
And how, how would you
as an association become aware of that?
Because you said there's no reporting mechanism as such.
That's right. It would be
what it would come up at a conference
or, um, you people reporting.
Just, just, just wondering where, where,
where you gather your statistics on this.
Sure. So we, um, we uh,
have position statements which are member informed.
We do have, we've had a fireworks, uh,
position statement since 2019.
That's the newest ratification of it.
And that goes through quite, uh, huge, a large amount of,
um, membership engagement
and then through some internal processes to make sure
that we've got, um, the evidence to, to back it.
So we do engage with our members that way.
We engage as a survey
with our members when this petition came to us.
So we had a very small window, so it wasn't as big a pool
as we would've liked, although we did get a decent amount
and we came up with 90%
of our veterinarians are significantly concerned about the
welfare of animals due to fireworks.
Alright. Uh, members further questions.
Alright, look again, thank you. Very good submission.
Um, and it's, uh, melds well with, uh,
the other submissions we're hearing from
'cause we're about to hear also from
veterinarians for animal welfare.
Ro welcome
Kiata. Kira,
you're welcome to remain on for the
next three submissions.
Wonderful, thank you so much. Kiata Coto Corn.
Natalie Lloyd Toko.
I've worked as a companion animal veterinarian in clinical
practice here in Wellington for 25 years.
Oops. Bear with me.
We're getting some technical issues
from your end. Can you hear me okay?
We we can hear you. Okay.
You're frozen screen, but, um, okay.
Okay. Well as long as the cat can
make my shoulder, I'll be good.
It's a fascinating, fascinating shot.
So I have, uh, well that's actually a really lovely leader
and I have memberships to the Australian New Zealand College
of Veterinary Feline Medicine.
So I'm a little bit of a crazy cat lady.
I'm also the immediate past president
of the Companion Animal Vet branch
of the New Zealand Vet Association,
and I'm a current member
of the Essential Standards Committee
of the World's Small Animal Veterinarian Association.
Today I am speaking on behalf of the members, uh,
of the veterinarians for animal welfare, Oura,
also known as vaa.
So we are a group led by veterinarians
and animal welfare scientists.
As such, our advocacy is solidly underpinned.
Now if you've read our written submission,
there's a little bit of a typo there.
It does say unpinned, so underpinned by science
and we are animal welfare focused.
Our vision is a good life for all.
That's animals, humans, and our unique AL environment.
We thank the petition select committee for the opportunity
to present our submission today in support
of the positions presented by, uh, um, cook Harrison
and Anime's Holding Limited.
And we take our written submission as Read,
VA's members support a total ban on the sale
and public use of fireworks due to the regular
and serious negative impacts on animals,
people, and the environment.
In roa.
We agree with many points
that have already been raised in previous submissions from
the petitioners from Fire and Emergency New Zealand
and from the New Zealand Vet Association.
Fireworks have a detrimental impact on
pets, livestock, and horses.
This is often manifested as significant injuries
and trauma as referenced
by my veterinary colleagues from the
New Zealand Vet Association.
Fireworks also impact the welfare
and environments that our wildlife live in Easton
and they impact our communities resulting
in injuries to people.
We note that many of these injuries, uh, occur
to children under the age of 10.
In our submission today, I want
to focus on some different areas.
Greg, I know that you've been asking about, um, what kind
of recording, uh,
and data we have around injuries, around physical injuries.
But I want to focus on a wider problem,
which is the unseen harm of fireworks on our pets
and also on the impact
of fireworks on the environment Papa to Aku.
While stories of injuries such
as horses getting caught in fences, damage to livestock
and cats and dogs getting tragically hit
or injured by cars often make the media the large number
of pets experiencing emotional injuries are not reported.
New Zealand literature informs us that a significant number,
so 74% in 2018 of pet caregivers reported
that their pets were afraid of fireworks.
However, we also recognize that for many animals,
these signs can go unnoticed.
The actual impact is likely to still be under reported.
And that's because we have challenges recognizing the
expression of fear and anxiety in many pets,
and particularly our feline friends.
Where this emotional impact is recognized,
treatment is not always commonly sought.
So again, when we are trying to, um,
collate some data about
how often these injuries are happening, we know
that only about 20 to 20,
I think 28% across three different studies reported that,
uh, pet caregivers actually would take their vets in
and seek advice or, or medical treatment.
We know that animals have a heightened sense of hearing
fireworks allowed and unpredictable.
And as my colleagues have already mentioned,
it can be very hard because of that sporadic nature
and unpredictable nature for us to be able
to manage them in a proactive way.
Research from the University
of Sydney in 2024 illustrated the fact
that young dogs especially are recognized as a group
that shows signs of both physiological
and psychological distress.
Cats on the other hand, are creatures of habit and routine.
So cats are kind of control freaks.
Um, and we know that that, um, that for cats, uh,
that unpredictable
and sporadic nature really adds
to their distress and their fear.
So the impact of these emotional events can be
very long lasting.
We know that animals develop sound sensitivities following
firework exposure, and they can go on to react to thunder,
they can react to, sounds like cars, backfiring sirens,
any, any loud noises over time, the response of animals
with sound sensitivities can then range from anxiety
related behaviors.
They can damage furniture, they can damage the home.
I've seen dogs eat through doors, um, through walls.
I've seen animals who will climb down behind fridges to try
and seek a safe place.
They can urinate, they can defecate indoors, um,
and they can even develop, uh,
redirected aggression behaviors towards other household
members like other pets.
So these behaviors are often long lasting if
management isn't sought.
Uh, and I've already touched on how, um, it it's not, uh,
the majority of people are not seeking, uh,
veterinary intervention for these behaviors.
The outcome of that is, um, ultimately damage to the bond
between the family, um,
or the person that their animal's living with and their pet.
And what that can then result in is increased rates
of surrender or even euthanasia of pets.
The benefit of owning a companion animal is well
documented in research.
So we know that there are both mental
and physical benefits to owning a companion animal.
Uh, and surrendering
or, um, having to say goodbye to a pet is, um, damaging
for humans as well as it can be, uh, for the pet themselves.
So finally, I just wanna touch on the impact
of fireworks on Papa Nuku.
And we recognize that these devices cause air pollution,
vegetation damage.
We've talked about that in our submission
last night at the entrance to Tomahawk Beach in Otago.
We know that fire engulfed an area a few hundred meters long
and a few, uh, a few meters deep.
This fire was reported to be believed, sorry,
it was believed to be caused by fireworks.
So not only, um, is that event extremely damaging
to the dunes and the lagoon where we know migratory
and waiting birds, including the white heron or koku lives.
Uh, but the frustration of the fire, uh,
an emergency New Zealand representative at the time was
evident in his words.
He said it's always one of those things
where we argue about it every year, but it is what it is.
So I think it would be great to stop arguing
and actually see something happening here.
So I thank you for your time, Nui, uh,
and I'm very happy to take any questions.
Alright, thank you very much, uh, members, any questions?
That's very clear. Thank you. Yeah, no, thank you.
I think probably having had the, uh, veterinary association
and others here I think are probably pretty well covered.
So thank you very much. Um, thank you for your patience. Um,
No problem at all.
Okay, thank you so much.
Right. And uh,
we have the SPCA now have you got people coming in
on Zoom as well, or no?
No, you're right. Good. Thank you.
I I had you down as Zoom, so
No, we, we changed our mind
and thought we would like to present in person to the
Committee. Well thank you for doing that.
So
look forward to hearing from you.
Uh, Koto, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Dr. AA Dale.
I'm the Chief Scientific Officer for the SPCA.
Um, and we are the oldest
and largest animal welfare organization in New Zealand.
We are an evidence-based animal welfare organization.
We support, we have over, um, a hundred thousand supporters
that I'm here representing today
with my colleague, Dr. Allison Baugh.
Um, and we have been advocating for a ban
on the importation, the sale
and use of fireworks for decades.
So we are very pleased that we are able to once again
argued that it is the right thing to do for New Zealand.
So we are in strong support of the, um,
three petitions calling for a ban on the private sale
of fireworks in New Zealand.
Um, we also, we thank the petitioners very much
for all of their hard work.
We also thank Jenny Markoff
for putting in the private members bill,
and we look forward to supporting that
and also reading a copy.
I look forward to reading it.
Um, so we're going to take our submission as read, um,
and we're going to use our time just
to highlight a few key points and then
have time for questions.
Um, we thought it was quite ironic
that the hearing was the day after Guy Forks.
I'm not sure if that was deliberate or just coincidental.
Um, but obviously for many New Zealanders,
as we've heard from many of our submitters,
today is a night of terror.
Uh, but it's not just a night, is it? It's months of terror.
Um, and for some it means celebration
and we absolutely appreciate celebration
and we are not the fun police,
but for countless animals it means terror
injury and even death.
Hmm. And we'll talk about some of the statistics,
particularly in relation to the
questions that you've been asking.
Um, so just the evidence of harm, as you've heard already,
is overwhelming up to three quarter of dogs
and cats show fear to fireworks
and four out of five fourth owners report anxiety and panic.
So I'm gonna hand over to my colleague Alison now
to talk about some of the statistics for you.
Yeah. So it's, we've talked a lot about fear and panic
and this is the majority of cats and dogs and also horses.
But it's not only fear.
Um, over a quarter
of horse owners have had their animals injured
as a result of fireworks.
Jen, you may be among them.
Um, and that ranges from cuts to broken limbs
and can often result in euthanasia.
We have heard the story of, um,
the beautiful horse Remy last year who died.
Um, other horses also die. All of them are reported.
There's the stallion Rockefeller who also died
and it also impacts farm animals.
So last year a beautiful heifer, um, died as a result
of becoming entangled in a fence.
While our cats and dogs are somewhat easier
to physically protect
because we can bring 'em inside our homes.
We do know from research that around 6% of cats
and dogs are injured as a result of fireworks.
And I would agree with the previous, um, presenter that
that's probably an underestimate.
Um, already this year we've heard about the death
of this beautiful dog, Izzy, whose owners very responsibly,
fully fenced yard let their dog out to pee.
And because of the severity of the panic, the dog fled
and was hit by a car.
We also know that wildlife are hugely
impacted in zoo animals.
Wildlife is much easier, uh, much more difficult, sorry
to get a really accurate, um, uh, uh,
appreciation of the impact.
But we do know that here in New Zealand, unlike
where Guy Fox originated,
this is our nesting season for our Native birds.
And we do know from research internationally
that far it's gonna have a huge impact on bird behavior,
impacting feeding behavior,
causing mass panic flights in collisions
and also nest abandonment.
And also unlike, uh, in the northern hemisphere here,
it is often quite dry and fires are a very real concern.
And from the data we can see that fires are caused
by fireworks have been increasing.
So 67% in twenty twenty two, a hundred and six.
In 2023, that's a 58% increase.
A hundred, uh, sorry, 166 in 2024.
That is a 57% increase on the year before.
We cannot underestimate the impact
of this on our native wildlife.
Mm-hmm. It also impacts, uh, conservation programs
for native birds in our zoos.
We know the zoos are very heavily in favor of controls.
Now all of these are completely predictable,
completely avoidable harms to animals
that occur every single year.
And as we know, it is not just one day, this will continue.
And I think especially this year
as Guy Fox is not on a weekend, we can expect more stories
of animals injured and killed in the coming days.
Now, public support
for controls on fireworks are very clear as well.
The number of people who have signed these petitions is more
than any petition on this in the past.
And there have been many petitions on this issue.
Surveys show that the majority of New Zealanders
and uh, perhaps no surprise, over 80% of pet owners
really want to see a ban on private
sale and use of fireworks.
And while we have talked
and we have heard a lot today about the harms of fireworks,
what is missing from the conversation when we're weighing up
the costs and benefits is robust evidence of
what even is the benefit
of having private sale and use of fireworks.
There is no robust evidence that allowing private sale
and use of fireworks provides social
or cultural values that could not be achieved
through licensed public displays.
Public displays allow a way for communities to get together
to import important cultural days together as a community.
And with that I'll hand over time.
So we are an animal welfare organization.
Our mission is to advance animal
welfare and prevent cruelty.
This one is very clear, it's very easy
to prevent cruelty if the committee so wishes
to recommend that to the government.
But we take a one welfare approach, so we look at it
through the lens of the animals, but we equally care about
the harm to people
and we equally care about the harm
to the environment as well.
So it's a very holistic view.
But where we are left at the moment is we are left
with a situation where we've got the harms
very well evidenced, widespread and serious.
And the benefits are very small or anecdotal.
We've had repeated petitions
and surveys show
that New Zealanders overwhelmingly support a ban on
the private sale and use.
And well, we support that.
We want the importation ban as well.
Um, and that they absolutely will support license
notified public events so that animal owners
where they can take, um, mitigations
to reduce harm to their animals.
However, we would much prefer only to see laser
and drone shows in New Zealand as a form of entertainment.
That would be what our preference would be.
We take a very pragmatic approach.
If we have to have public displays, we would accept that.
But we would much prefer to see alternatives
that are much better for our animals and our environment
and actually much more fun to watch
than fireworks that have to say.
They're also cheaper. And we know
that the cost is, is a big issue.
And we know for some councils budgets are tight,
but so they are a cheaper alternative than it is
for fireworks on.
And actually, you know, we are in a situation where we have
boy races firing fireworks at the police.
We have Otago University students
firing fireworks at each other.
And then emergency responders when they come,
my daughter just finished at Otago, thank goodness
I wouldn't want her involved with that
or inadvertently struck by one of these, um, fireworks.
Um, and we have firework, we have fires.
They're just everywhere.
You know, last night at my house,
I felt like I was in a war zone
and my, my animals certainly felt it
and my children couldn't go to sleep.
You know, that's how bad it is. So it is problematic.
And so how can the status quo be justified?
There is a clear public mandate
and political momentum that the time to act is now.
These are avoidable harms and we can fix it.
So we respectfully ask the committee to recommend
to the government to take steps to end the private sale
and use and importation of fireworks in New Zealand
and support legislative reform to achieve this outcome
and ensure animal welfare evidence informs future decisions.
But just before we hand over to, uh,
before we, we allow questions, I have one question
for the committee that I would like to ask specifically
for Mr. Fleming, if that's okay.
Mm-hmm. Last week you were quoted
as saying there's been plenty of things over the years
that their time has eventually come
if they can hit the tipping point.
I think this one definitely could.
And our question to you is what more do you think is needed
to reach the tipping point?
Now look, I'll just say to be fair to Mr. Fleming,
we've heard evidence today
and when we go off the public, we'll sit
and evaluate all the evidence.
So, um, I'll, uh, I'll, I'll put say that, I'll just say
that it would be very unfair, um, to put that
to Mr. Fleming now because actually we try to be
as evidence based as absolutely can.
Um, and I know that we are all better informed today than
we were when we came here.
Um, that's what we endeavor to do. That's right.
So he may well have made a statement
before he knew a lot Thank you today. So,
Or he may not have gone Hard enough.
I'm not running interference, but I'm just
No, no. In the context. No
Justice. Yeah,
no, very well said Mr. Chair.
I, um, the, yeah, the, the, uh,
radio New Zealand reporter asked me the question.
Um, and yeah, it was made in the context and I,
and I still stand completely by that.
And I think, and I went on to say in that interview
that I think, uh, this is
where this hearing was gonna contribute,
um, substantially to that.
And we'll see where it goes from here.
Can I ask a question at this point, Mr. Chair?
Well, since you've got one to you, you can see,
Um, it seems pretty clear that what you are looking
for is a ban, not just on the retail sale
of fireworks, but on the use of them, right? Correct.
And reputation. Alright.
'cause the un unless, uh, yeah. Alright.
So it's really clear that whatever legislation is comes
before the house to meet your, to fulfill.
What you're looking for is you want the ban, um, of the, of,
of the, of the use of them, not just the retail.
Correct. Okay. Yes. Great. Thank you.
Well, that, it's a question I probably could have asked
somewhere other submitters is that if, um,
and some people have mentioned, which
of course occurs in the middle of winter,
would it be much different if the
fireworks night was in the middle of winter than in really
what is late spring do you think?
Actually, as far as the animals go?
Does that animal behavior, is that, I mean,
just I know it's a don't answer.
Don't but just a that's one of the things that
Occurred to me. No, I, I think that's
a really valid question.
Um, I'm actually from the UK originally.
Uh, I do remember as a child going to public displays
of fireworks and I do remember it being very rainy
and very wet and very dark.
So I think the key difference here is in New Zealand it is
dry, it is often windy and our native birds are nesting.
So I think from that perspective, in terms of the risk
of fires and the impacts on our native birds, it probably is
less in, in winter.
Um,
The same date in uk
Well that's where it all started. Yes.
Yeah. No, the same fifth
Remember remember 5th of November. Yes. So
Just in terms of, just wanna, again, wanting to clarify,
'cause if we are hitting the tipping point,
I wanna really clarify really clear on
what it is that we're trying to do here.
So define for me what you mean by fireworks
and what I mean by that is that, um, one potential piece
of legislation might, might be making, so
that house still allows firework,
just reduces significantly the what's in there.
So for example, bad boy will you hear when they Yes.
I love saying that every time Bad boy said, um, that, uh,
apparent currently, and in fact we've got, um, uh, uh,
MV can, can potentially, uh, confirm this.
It's four 40 milligrams is
the limit at the moment, isn't it?
Uh, so, but,
but you can get party poppers that are 20, uh, milligrams.
Would you be happy with party poppers?
I think it party poppers are like,
you can use them indoors.
Yeah. So I think that would be a difference in terms of the,
the sound and the impact.
It's much more localized than say fireworks. Okay.
And I think, um, when we look at other jurisdictions,
there's some areas where fireworks aren't allowed
for sale if the public, but say sparklers are Right.
So I think there are places to have compromise. Okay.
Um, and there's probably nuances in there,
but I think a party popper's on a whole different scale in
terms of the, the decibels.
Thank you. Alright, look, thank you very much.
And just for all our submitters, I know we're sort
of down the end of the table here.
Normally we're a small committee, we're in a smaller room,
but, um, so we'll be a little bit closer to you.
But, uh, what's happened,
because we're expecting so many people,
we actually went to do a bigger room.
So that's why we, we are not trying
to put ourselves distant in ourselves and yourselves.
Just to, just to make that clear look,
thank you very much for all our submitters.
Um, this is really, as I said,
this is about information gathering so
that when we make our decision, we'll put a report back
to Parliament with some recommendations or
otherwise, um, it'll be based on some
of the best evidence we've heard
before the committee for a long time.
Yeah. Yeah. So thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank
You for your Time. Thank you
Alison. Nice to see
you in person. I
Know, I was just thinking.